Floods in Pakistan continue to remain a national calamity.
Army invariably is called upon in aid of civil power for undertaking relief rescue operations for protection of life and property during flood season.
Over the period, army has developed a comprehensive organizational setup to fight any challenges resulting from floods in the country.
Miscellaneous National Tasks
Flood Relief Operations
Floods in Pakistan continue to remain a national calamity. Army invariably is called upon in aid of civil power for undertaking relief rescue operations for protection of life and property during flood season. Over the period, army has developed a comprehensive organizational setup to fight any challenges resulting from floods in the country.
Army Flood Protection and Relief Organization
Army Flood Protection and Relief structure comprises following:
General Headquarters Flood Relief Centre
This centre was established in 1977 and since then it is functioning under General Staff Branch(Engineer Directorate)
Corps Flood Control Centres
Established in 1977, these centres work under respective Corps Headquarters
Liasion with Provincial Governments
Commanders Corps Engineers at Lahore, Karachi, Peshawar and Quetta function as the Army liaison/coordinating officers with the respective Provincial Governments
Conduct of Flood Relief Operation
Before onset of flood season, certain precautionary and prep-measures are initiated which are described in ensuing paras:
Precautionary Measures
Inspection of all flood protection works is carried out by the Corps Headquarters. Necessary contingency plans are also prepared after coordination with civil authorities for any unforeseen tasks. These actions are completed by 30 May each year. Necessary liaison/coordination is carried out with civil authorities in their area of responsibility by Commanders Corps Engineers to ensure that related actions have been completed before the onset of flood season. Major activities at this stage include:
Allocation of deployment areas to units/formations
Allocation and testing of equipment for flood relief operations
Setting up of operation rooms and communications at all levels
Finalization of move plans and logistic support
Army Pre Flood Season Coordination Conference
Army Pre Flood Season Coordination Conference is held in Engineer Directorate every year to coordinate various aspects with civil agencies at Army level. The conference is chaired by the Engineer-in-Chief and attended by all Commanders Corps Engineers, Chairman Federal Flood Commission, Secretaries of Provincial Irrigation, Power Departments and representative of other concerned departments.
Functioning of Food Relief Center
Army flood relief centre established at Engineers Directorate General Headquarters is functioning round the clock during flood period. The duties assigned are:
Receipt of Flood Situation Reports
Daily weather forecast/flood situation report is obtained from Meteorological Department, Federal Flood Commission and a comprehensive situation report is forward to all concerned
Coordination with Meteorological Department
Any significant change in weather forecast/flood situation received from Meteorological Officer is further communicated to respective Corps Headquarters through Fax and signal
Monitoring of River Discharge
Data on Historic peak floods and discharge capacity of different rivers at various hydraulic structures is kept as reckoner in flood relief centre and is monitored continuously to ensure timely action if needed
Flood Relief Equipment
Equipment for flood relief operations is procured through Irrigation and Power Department according to the requirement of different formations. The equipment is repaired centrally under arrangements at Headquarters Engineers 4 Corps for the formations located within Punjab. Similarly repair for remaining formations equipment is undertaken by respective Provincial Governments
Breaching Sections
Breaching sections at different bunds and embankments have been planned to save hydraulic structures. Explosive for these breaching sections is provided by Irrigation and Power Departments/concerned department. Explosive is further issued to formations and is maintained by respective Army units on behalf of Provincial Governments
Post Flood Conference
Post flood conference is held at the end of Flood Season during November/December at Engineer Directorate which is chaired by Engineer-in Chief and attended by all concerned military and civil authorities. Detailed postmortem of current year flood activities is carried out and appropriate actions are initiated to overcome shortfalls
Assistance in Aid of Civil Administration
Army has been always forthcoming in assisting civil administration with its own resources in all tasks which has a contributory effect towards nation building.
Education System
Army is already running some of the best education institutions in the country. National University of Science and Technology, Cadet Colleges and a large no of Army Public Schools/ Federal Government institutions are few visible examples. The beneficiaries include 57% civilians